Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen.
Today on the University of strength we
are going to be talking about strategies
to guarantee your progression in your
training. This is all programming
strategies and it's based on discussions
and questions that you guys ask me and
there's actually three strategies that
we use and listing them to start our
session. Linear periodization with a
gradual reduction in repetitions over
the long-term plan. Now this is very
obvious but it still deserves a mention.
Uh the next one is progressing exercise
selection. Starting with more complex
exercises at the start of the long-term
plan and gradually over the course of
the long-term plan, we increase the
mechanical advantage of the exercises.
Finishing on usually the competition
standard movements. So I know not
everyone competes. However, I still like
to use competition standard lifts
because that's the way that we express
our strength with the strongest
techniques is the powerlifting
techniques. conventional deadlift or a
sumo deadlift, whichever one you prefer.
Typically, it's an archback bench press
with a wider grip, but not everyone
suits that technique. Whatever suits
you, and a low bar squat. And then the
third strategy is periodizing effort
across the meso cycle. If you haven't
heard of that before, you will today.
Here's a few disclaimers. So, obviously,
nothing's guaranteed forever. So when I
say guarantee, it's a little bit of a
clickbaity title, but at the same time,
I would say these are strategies that
I've used very, very successfully to the
point where the people that I work with,
including myself, continually progress.
It slows down, of course, the better you
get. The law of diminishing returns
applies, but diminishing returns are
still returns. Let's start with linear
or traditional periodization. So I put
both terms. The correct terminology is
traditional periodization. Traditional
means typically starting the long-term
plan with the highest amount of volume
and lowest amount of intensity and
gradually over the course of the
long-term plan, we decrease that volume
so that we can increase the intensity.
So, it's kind of logical. Starting with
higher reps at the start of the
long-term plan, every time we reduce
repetitions, it allows us to be able to
shift heavy loads, which is one nice
strategy to set someone up to be able to
succeed. Every week we come into the
gym. Think about it. You want to be able
to lift heavier weights. So that's the
simplest strategy that we use that's
been used wasn't created by me. It's
kind of the start of periodization was
traditional style of periodization. With
this strategy of course linear style of
periodization isn't the only strategy.
I'm using this as a discussion. But
there are other styles of periodization
such as undulating which doesn't reduce
repetitions or reduce volume in a linear
fashion. It is a wavelike pattern.
However, there is still some elements of
linearity in our undulating program just
as there are in other styles of
periodization. You know, just for the
purpose of this discussion, you guys
understand what I'm talking about.
Setting someone up for success when
we're creating a long-term plan is
pretty damn important. Success means
coming into the gym and every time you
come into the gym, you know, you're
going to get better. Okay, so these are
the other strategies that we use. So
undulating uh conjugate and rotary
different strategies but there's still
always linearity but you know for the
purpose of the discussion traditional
style of periodization it's very logical
because it creates a structured pathway
for overload progression strategy number
two is exercise selection something that
I'm going to talk about with exercises.
So this is kind of it's related but it's
a bit of a side note often people ask me
a question about overload techniques. So
a very common overload technique is
something like a rack pull with a
deadlift where you are reducing the
range of motion significantly so that
you are able to shift heavier loads. The
logic behind this is teaching someone to
handle a heavier load. So when you come
back to the regular technique, weights
feel a lot lighter in your hands. Now
that is a strategy that may work for
some, but for me I just don't like it
very much. I don't like setting someone
up to lift a heavier load and then have
to use a lighter load on their testing
day or their competition day for two
reasons. One, it's disheartening. I
don't ever want to set you up to reduce
the weight, right? Whatever weight we
start with, I only want to go up from
the start of the long-term plan all the
way to peaking session. I only want to
add weight to the bar. So, reducing
weight is is not my favorite strategy.
as well as the heavier loads we
artificially teach our body to be able
to lift. When I say artificially, it's
like unrackcks. So, that's another
strategy that some people succeed with.
I don't like it's because when we're
lifting a heavier load than what we're
going to be doing in competition, the
competition strategy lifts are demanding
enough and require enough time for
recovery compared to what we're going to
be doing with things like, you know, our
overload techniques. Hope that makes
sense to you guys. But it's a strategy.
I will say there are many ways to skin a
cat. I just prefer my way which is to
not overload. So there's that disclaimer
out of the way typically. So a general
overview of some of the strategies that
I like to do with my uh exercise
selection over the course of the
long-term plan. Starting with longest
ranges of motion exercises, exercises
with the highest technical complexity or
hardest, the most difficult, the most
challenging variations or the least
mechanically advantageous versions or
variations of the exercises. And over
the course of the long-term plan, we
gradually progress towards the
competition standard movements. So, here
are some of the methods that we like to
use at the start of the long-term plan
to increase the degree of difficulty and
force you to lift a lighter weight. So,
starting with these harder variations
and then gradually progressing to easier
variations is another strategy that we
use to guarantee that you're going to
just add weight to the bar every phase
that you come into the gym. So, the
strategies include slower eentrics,
pauses, one and a quarter reps, longer
variations, longer ranges of motion like
deficit patterns, and more difficult
body positions. So, I'm going to give
you guys a bunch of examples with each
of the main patterns. Let's start with a
deadlift. So, I'm going to give you an
example of this out of the long-term
plan. One of my favorite ways of doing
this is a snatch grip deadlift from a
deficit with slow eentrics because then
I'll progress you after that to the same
movement pattern without the slow
eccentrics. So, it's kind of like small
progression. So, this is something we
have to understand with exercise
variation. It's one of the most common
arguments against frequent variations
is, you know, you're not giving
ourselves enough time to master any of
the specific movements. I like
four-weekly messy. So, a lot of people
might argue that four-w weekly is too
frequent to include variations of
exercises. You're not giving yourself
enough time to get the most out of the
exercise. So, therefore, my argument
against that or my argument for my
position is using exercises that
logically progress to the next. Okay.
So, when I say variations, it's not as
if it's a wild variation that has no
relation to each other. Snatch group
deadlift from a deficit with slow
eccentrics. The next phase could be the
same exercise with no slow eccentric. So
a regular or drop it like it's hot as I
like to say. Moving from there, we go a
clean grip or a regular grip deadlift
from the deficit with the pause. So
that's a strategy where it's slightly
easier than a snatch grip deadlift, but
it's still quite hard. and then moving
to a standard deficit deadlift and then
moving to a smaller deficit deadlift
before we move to our competition
standard deadlift over time. Range of
motion decreases, technical complexity
decreases, leverage improve and loading
potential increases. Hope that makes
sense for you guys. Snatch grip deadlift
from a deficit with a slow eccentric. I
would say that's the hardest variation
that I have, right? A harder variation
could be increasing the deficit even
further. So the deficit that I like to
use is typically a red bumper plate.
That's a pretty big deficit. I typically
don't go higher than that. Variation of
that movement that causes you to
decrease that load even further, forcing
you to use longer ranges of motion, you
know, more knee flexion, more hip
flexion. So, the knee extensors need to
work harder and the hip extensors need
to work harder. Squat progression
examples starting with So, some of my
favorites, and this is an interesting
one. So, starting the long-term plan
with the most challenging squat
patterns. I'm excluding front squats to
this. You can include front squats and
often I do include front squats. We need
a logical explanation for every
exercise. A lot of these times I'm
looking at strengthening someone for,
you know, a strength standard of a low
bar squat in the end. And a front squat
doesn't have as much carryover to a back
squat as a back squat. So that's where I
would consider it to be too much
variation, although sometimes I do it.
And there is another reason why I don't
use front squats at the start of the
long-term plan is because we need to
logically pair the exercise with the rep
range. Now, something that I've always
followed, this was an original
recommendation from my early mentor
Charles Polloquin. Don't do front squats
more than six reps because this is where
the limiting factor of a high rep range,
high volume exercise like a front squat
is going to be the up your upper back.
So, that's where you're going to fail
first. And it kind of makes sense to me
because I used to do tons of front
squats. Not anymore. I'm quite good at
front squatting. I will say my best is a
260 kg front squat after not really
practicing the front squat at all. This
was after doing exclusively low bar
squats and high bar squats. And then for
shits and giggles, one of my
weightlifting friends, Sunonny Webster,
asked me how much I think I could front
squat. And I said, "Oh, probably about
260. I don't know." He got his phone out
and he went live on his Instagram and he
said, "Uh, right guys, Bass said that
he's going to front squat 260 kg today."
And I thought, "Oh, damn it." You know,
got to put your money where your mouth
is now. Anyway, I went on and I front
squatted 260 kg. Uh, this is also
because I'm a bit of a nerd with numbers
and calculations and converting, you
know, percentages with high bar. What
that goes, you know, your front squat is
85% of your high bar squat and your low
bar squat is 10% more than that. So, I
was kind of basing the calculations on
that and I said, "Yeah, but it should be
260 kg." Anyway, I went off and did it.
Either way, I'm not including it in this
squat progression. If you want to
include it, we need to be logical about
this. At the start of the long-term
plan, typically I'm using a higher rep
range, and I don't like to pair my front
squats with my high rep range exercises.
So, therefore, I've started with a
stiletto squat with an extra high heel
elevation. I typically use a pause there
as well. Now talking a little bit about
the exercise. A lot of you have used
this exercise. Paused stiletto high bar
squat. This is my favorite quad builder
and I do believe that this is better
than a front squat pattern. So a lot of
people say the more upright you are, the
more the knees bend. Yeah, this is true.
But the loadability of placing the
barbell on the back is superior to
placing the barbell on the front of the
shoulders. And therefore the slight
change in torso angle from a high bar
position to a front squat position may
make you a little bit less vertical but
the loading makes the back squat
superior. So load wins load contributes.
So load and and position all will
contribute to how we target a muscle.
And I would say that in this instance
the trade-off that you lose from
position you will gain in loadability.
Harry, just curious. So, would you say
in your experience that back squats
carries over to a front squat more than
a front squat carries over to a back
squat? How's this? I believe a back
squat carries over to a front squat more
than a front squat carries over to a
front squat. Okay? Because of the
loadability aspect of it. Okay? So, if
you're a weightlifter, if you got two
weightlifterss, I would say, of course,
if you want to master the front squat,
you got to do more front squats. But if
you had the options, which we always do,
and I'm going to use a hypothetical
example here. If you had one athlete
that did purely front squats to get the
best front squat ever and another
athlete that used a front squat and a
back squat, I guarantee you that the
person who used both would have a
superior front squat. The high bar squat
is a superior way to load the quadriceps
safely. Okay, so this is sounding like
I'm contradicting myself when I'm
talking about overloading techniques.
It's not really an overloading
technique. It's an intelligent loading
technique. Starting with a stiletto
squat. Now, here's this. I typically use
a pause with my stiletto squat
variations. Why? Why? Why? Think about
the range of motion. It is extreme in
knee bend. That's one of the first
comments that I'll get is whenever I'm
doing a stiletto squat is, damn, if I
tried that, my knees would explode. To
which my response is typically I don't
kind of just start here and just go
really really heavy with a stiletto
squat. This is something that I've been
progressing for years. I've been
strengthening my knees to be able to
support these loads over a long period
of time. I didn't just come in here and
do a very very heavy stiletto high bar
squat. And this is how I load everybody
is progressively starting with a very
light weight that they can handle safely
and gradually progress. This is how it's
done. I am just quite strong. So let's
add context. When I do a 225 kg stiletto
squat, this is the time when I able to
squat with a low bar technique 300 kg.
So it's a significant difference, right?
So, it's all relative. Either way,
stiletto squat increases the hell out of
that knee bend, right? That's the whole
objective of that movement is to
maximize knee bend to the point where
the hamstrings are pressing against the
card. So, this increases the hell out of
that range of motion. This is the
longest range of motion squat pattern
that I will give you. You can't bend
further than that. So, therefore, you're
going to have to reduce those loads.
Then, moving over to just a regular high
bar squat with slow eentrics. I should
have included in there that every time I
do a high bar squat, I will use elevated
heel squatting shoes. I don't do high
bar squats with bare feet. Even if you
have very good mobility, the best of the
best weightlifterss in the Olympics all
have incredible ankle joint dorsif
flexion. They all have incredible
mobility. Weightlifterss are the second
most mobile athletes in the Olympics.
Who are the first? Gymnasts, of course.
Yet, they still use weightlifting shoes.
Why? Why? If they're mobile enough to do
it without. The answer is because it
makes it even better. It optimizes that
position. Okay? So, elevating the heels
is not a cheat. It optimizes your
ability to position your body with an
upright torso and knees forward, which
is kind of like the position that you
need to be in, the optimal position you
need to be in to hold the heaviest
weights overhead in a snatch and clean a
joke. Uh, Christa, this may be off topic
slightly, but if you want program squats
twice a week, what would you do with the
other variation, if that makes sense?
Uh, there's so many ways to skin a cat,
and it makes plenty of sense. Maybe I'd
do squats on one day and lunges another
day. Maybe I do the same variation
twice. A lot of the times when I squat
twice a week, I do low bar one session
and high bar the next session. Now,
here's one strategy that I'm giving you
is starting with the most complex
movements and gradually making them
easier over the course of the long-term
plan. That is one strategy. Here's my
disclaimer. At the highest level, I'll
always include so for myself on my squat
on my long-term preparations, I'm always
using some variation throughout the
entire prep of the exact competition
lift. I focus on pure specificity. Okay?
So, if I do two squat sessions, which I
quite often do, I'll do a low bar from
start to finish. Okay? I'll do a
competition style bench press from start
to finish. And then I'll use an
accessory on the second day, such as an
incline press or an overhead press or a
spotter press or a close grip press or
variations of. Quite often, I love to do
two sessions per week for most of my
movements, except of course for the
deadlift. It's a lot more demanding. My
second session for the deadlift for the
week is actually a squat. The squat
strengthens at the exact same patterns,
but it's far less demanding than a
deadlift in my experience, which has
trained the strongest commercial
deadlifter on the planet. So, we've got
all of the progressions here. Stiletto
squat. I'll add the pause in there for
safety. So, this is what I've been
alluding to. Adding the pause in there
for safety. What does that do? It
reduces the bounce. So, bouncing
aggressively with that maximal range of
motion is probably not advisable,
especially with a super heavy load.
Okay. So this is where you'd go a slow
eccentric with a pause for that stiletto
high bar squat. Moving on to a high bar
squat with slow eccentrics and then with
one and a quarters and then with pauses.
All of that with heels of course. And
then moving over to the low bar squat
with slow eccentrics and a low bar squat
with pauses before we then go on to a
straightup low bar squat competition
standards. Okay. So that's so many
different progressions. Of course, we
don't need all of those. A lot of the
times we might only be doing three or
four phases before we get to our
competition. So if it's a 16week block
and you're doing four weekly meo cycles,
you might go stiletto squat with a pause
to a high bar squat with a pause to a
low bar squat with a pause to a low bar
squat. So I've just given you a lot more
options here to choose from. Okay.
Again, the movement gradually becomes
easier to load while the athlete becomes
stronger throughout the process. This
creates a very natural progression
pathway towards heavier competition
standard lifting. Next up, bench press.
This is pretty simple. So quite often
just a very simple way of structuring
bench press over the long-term plan is
you start with a closer grip and then
gradually go wider over the course of
the long-term plan. Now let's add some
more complexities to this slow eentrics.
So you go close grip with slow eentric
and then we go close grip spotto pause.
Okay, so the spotto pause is where you
pause one inch or so to the chest, you
know, so pausing and then pressing. So
that forces you to hold an isometric
contraction uh at the most difficult
part of the lift which strengthens the
most difficult part of the lift which is
very advantageous. So there's three
patterns you could go for for a year
long with all of these. So month by
month go close grip with slow eentrics.
Then the next phase close grip with a
spotto pause. Then we go midgrip with
slow eentrics. Then we go mid-grip with
a spotto pause. And then we go wide grip
with slow eentrics. Then we go wide grip
with a spotto pause. And then we go
competition style bench press. Hope
those progressions make sense to you.
That's nine progressions that we've got
here. You don't need all nine. Okay? If
you're doing a 4x4 periodized plan, you
could only use four of those where you
could go close grip paused. So close
grip slow eentrics to a mid-grip spotto
a wide grip spotto a competition grip
press. Does flat foot com style bench
press make a difference with the
difficulty? It depends on who you're
talking to. Uh but technically yes. For
me, when I use a flat foot technique,
when I prescribe a flat foot technique,
there's two reasons for that. One is
because you're an IPF lifter and you
need to perform your bench press
competition with flat feet. Two is to
reduce the size of the arch. Why would I
want to reduce the size of the arch? A
number of reasons. One, to make it
slightly more challenging so that we can
do things like build muscle. So, in a
competition style bench press, the
objective is not to build muscle. It's
to shift the heaviest loads. Yes, you
can still build muscle, but that's not
the primary objective. Okay? And so when
I flatten the feet, it will reduce for
some people reduce the size of your
arch, therefore increase the range of
motion, therefore increase the muscle
building potential as well as decrease
the loadability of the movement. So it
makes it harder to lift heavy weights.
Instead of trying to max out the
competition movement all year round, we
progressively remove constraints over
time. This allows the athlete to
continue progressing while still
accumulating high quality training
volume. That's kind of the end of that
discussion on the second strategy to
guarantee progression over the course of
your long-term plan. So these are the
things that we think about, right? So
every time, so this is what we have to
understand. You know, there's a thing
called momentum and training morale,
right? So people don't like the idea of
not moving forward. As a coach to many
many people for 20 years, I've had so
many discussions with people asking them
about what their biggest struggles are
with their training. And by far the most
common response is that they have
plateaued. I'm sure many of you can
relate. That's one of the most
frustrating things about training is I'm
not damn well moving forward. In fact,
uh, early on in my career, I quit
training because I didn't know much
about training strategies. I didn't know
much about progressive overload. I
didn't know much about intelligent
programming. All I knew about was Arnold
Schwarzenegger encyclopedia. And my main
goal was to build muscle. And I got
really, really bored of training because
every time I came into the gym, I was
just lifting the same weights. and I was
unable to progress. I was trying as hard
as I could though, but I just couldn't
progress. So, yeah, I quit training and
I took up Brazilian jiu-jitsu. Wasn't
amazing in Brazilian jiu-jitsu, but
that's what I did. Until, of course, I
met a strength coach who taught me all
about intelligent programming and
progressive overloading. And then all of
a sudden, I shifted my focus from
working towards building as much muscle
as possible and looking good, which was
very subjective. you know, looking in
the mirror, pinching the skin around
your belly to see if you're getting any
leaner and flexing in the mirror to see
if you're looking better. Of course,
it's after a workout and an hour later,
uh, you're deflated and you don't look
as good anymore and, uh, you're
depressed again. Uh, so I got sick and
tired of training with that approach. So
then this was kind of my savior. So this
is why I turn to strength training. And
this is the message that I try and teach
to everyone that I work with. Of course,
not everyone wants to work with me, but
those who do kind of appreciate the
whole idea of being able to progress
forever. That's the goal. Anyway, funny
question. So, when I was uh presenting
once upon a time, it was actually 2018.
I was presenting with Andrew Lockach, my
dear friend and mentor who sadly passed
away. Stephie Conn, the best female
powerlifter in the world at the time. I
say female at one point. She was the
best powerlifter in the world in terms
of formula number one. and Ed Cohen,
also known as the goat, the greatest of
all time powerlifter. So nowadays that
title is being challenged by Colton
Engelre. But anyhow, Ed Cohen
nonetheless is the Michael Jordan of
powerlifting. We gave a presentation in
front of a whole bunch of people and at
the end of the day, someone, you know,
the audience were asking a bunch of
questions and one of the questions from
the audience was at what age do you
plateau? This was me at 38 ready to
compete the next day at Pro Raw. And I
thought, okay, um, I'm 38, but I haven't
plateaued yet, so I don't have a right
in answering this question, so I'm just
going to sit this one out. So, they were
asking to the panel. Ed Cohen put his
hand up immediately and answered the
question. And he said, if you know what
you're doing, you should never plateau.
He continued to say, "There's always a
weak point." So his strategy, if anyone
understands Ed Cohen's strategy was, you
know, he'd train for a competition, and
then when he finished the competition,
he'd do weak point training, strengthen
that weak point so it's no longer a weak
point, and then redo his prep with less
weak points, and then come in with a
stronger total, and he would rinse and
repeat that strategy. And every time he
would come and compete, he would put up
a bigger total. So he never plateaued.
And then the next question was, which
was a fair question, so why did you
stop, Ed? to which he answered, "I had
rheumatoid arthritis." You know, he kept
training. Of course, he's damn strong.
So, I remember watching him squatting
300 kg raw at 100 kg body weight well
into his retirement. I don't know what
age he was. Late 40s, early 50s, I don't
know. He wasn't a spring chicken. Put it
that way. And I watched him squat 300
damn well kilog. So, yeah, I love that
answer. If you know what you're doing,
you don't plateau. Spoken by the goat
himself. It's like, okay, compelling
argument you have there. Last but not
least, my favorite strategy to guarantee
progression is periodizing effort.
Periodizing effort. One of the biggest
mistakes people make is training too
hard too often. Okay, so this was one of
the biggest mistakes that I made in my
career. You know, it kind of makes
sense, right? We're rewarded for our
efforts. Working as hard as we can, you
know, should pay off, right? But the
analogy that I like to use is running a
marathon. So, what would it mean to work
as hard as you can in a marathon? Well,
working as hard as you can means running
as fast as you can, which means
sprinting. Is an intelligent marathon
strategy sprinting from the beginning.
Not that I've run a marathon, nor will
I, but I would say no. The best marathon
runners, they run very fast, actually. I
believe they're doing it under two
hours. Not sure exactly. Don't follow it
very closely, but they are freaks and
their speed throughout is probably
equivalent to most people's sprints.
However, it's not a sprint. Okay, so
this is, you know, at the highest level.
The strategy, the right strategy for
marathon running is to not sprint from
the start of the race. It's to pace
yourself. But it doesn't mean you're not
trying as hard as you can. They are damn
well trying as hard as they can. They
just understand the strategy. And the
same applies to setting yourself up for
a long-term plan. And when I say
long-term plan, I'm talking more about
the mess cycle. So my mess cycle, as you
guys know, my preferred meo cycle is
four weekly. Of course, sometimes I do 6
weeks and 8 weeks. Some of you may do up
to I've heard uh people do 13 weeks
which is an odd number for me. It's like
oh why would you do that? And I later
found out young Winston you still there?
Uh that's because you can split it up
into four of those per year. It's like
ah that's why 13 makes sense now. But
either way they all work so long as you
can justify why we're doing this. And my
justification for a four-weekly mess
cycle I have a few. One of those is it
allows me to take the weekly
progressions that I want to, which is
actually quite large. I like to be able
to jump in 5% loads week after week. So
if you consider, you know, that's, you
know, from week one to week four, that's
15% increase, right? One to week two is
5%, to week three is 5%. Yeah, 15%
increase. Sounds like four weeks it
should be 20%. But it's actually 15% cuz
you're only jumping three times. Start
weight and then you jump to week two,
it's 5%. Week three, there's 10%, week
four, 15%.
Now, how many more 5% jumps do you think
you can progress by? Right? Well, if you
do, you're starting way too light. Put
it that way. Okay? So, therefore, if
you're doing a six week progression, you
wouldn't be doing 5% jumps each week. Or
an 8week progression, the jumps need to
be smaller again. Now, I like bigger
jumps. Okay? Now, a lot of people that I
work with don't their strategy is to
work as hard as they can. In my opinion,
yeah, it may work, but in my opinion, my
way works better. Otherwise, I would do
the other way. Don't you think? Okay.
So, I've been working with myself at a
pretty high level and working with many
highle athletes. There's a few reasons
why we can start with a very low load.
Okay. So, so when you're starting when
you want to take bigger jumps, it means
you want to be starting with lower loads
so that you can set yourself up for
these bigger jumps. On the flip side,
this is one of most people's common
problems is they come in on week one of
a program and they try as hard as they
can. It's like, why wouldn't you try as
hard as you can? That's where you get
the best results. Of course, we got
people out there like uh the great
Dorian Yates talking about why would you
leave repetitions in the reserve? I
believe he calls out the wankers
workout. You know, why would you try
want to try hard? Uh, you know, as he's
making a sarcastic statement. Now, of
course, we have to understand there are
a lot of these claims if you guys are
following that are geared towards
hypertrophy being the desired outcome.
Not everyone's goal is hypertrophy
based. Myself, my goal is mainly
strength and a lot of the people that I
work with kind of strength. So, strength
training is becoming a lot more
mainstream, a lot more popularized.
However, a lot of the research, a lot of
the most influential authorities in the
fitness space talk mostly about
hypertrophy research and the best ways
to hypertrophy our muscles, which a lot
of the times the discussion moves
towards training as hard as you can. Why
do we train as hard as we can? The
answer is usually if we understand the
main mechanism of muscle hypertrophy
is a thing called mechanical tension.
The way that we achieve mechanical
tension, well, the moment you lift up a
weight, there's some degree of
mechanical tension, but we want, you
know, to apply more mechanical tension
for longer durations of time. So, higher
degrees of mechanical tension. The best
way to achieve that is by taking our
movements as close to failure as
possible and even to failure. And some
people say and beyond. So, if you look
at Dorian Yates, how he trained, that
was kind of like beyond. So, you do
train to fail, so you can't do any more
reps. And then you have assisted
repetitions from a spotting partner
allowing you to go beyond what you were
able to do without the assistance. Okay,
now this is the objective of this and
this is trending at the moment and I've
even put up a post about this talking
about you know how many total sets you
need. What's trending is two total sets
is optimal right now. So there's a lot
of discussion amongst the science
community talking about optimal sets per
body part per week is anywhere between
10 to 20. Now that's being debated
against saying too much. the body
doesn't need that much. Uh we're if we
do that, what we're doing is we're
setting ourselves up. We're not training
hard enough to be able to do that much
volume. And if we do train hard enough,
you're going to be training too much
beyond recovery. So anyhow, this
discussion isn't as black and white as
that. So I don't want to say two reps is
two sets per exercise is wrong. It's
not, but it depends uh on the
circumstances. It depends on the
individual. It depends on the
individual's ability to understand how
to work hard. Okay? So, a lot of
beginners, the analogy that I use, it's
not really an analogy. It's a comparison
between elite athletes. Go and have a
look at Dorian Yates's face when he's
training to fail. He's making funny
noises. He's a lot of discoloration and
and sweat and tears. Blood and guts is
the name of his video. So, blood and
guts is pouring out of his face, if you
could use that as an analogy. It's not
quite, but you know what I'm saying.
Compare that to a beginner. A beginner
training to fail. Uh, it's not quite the
same degree of pain. They're working as
hard as they can, but they fail mainly
because they can't coordinate their body
in a way to lift more repetitions. It's
very different. So therefore, the degree
of mechanical tension is absolutely not
the same. So you need to earn the right
to be able to push that hard to not do
that much volume. Another way of
thinking of this, if your goal is
hypertrophy, the stronger you get, the
less volume you should be doing. I've
had a lot of discussions with people who
want the best out of their training and
they talk about, you know, 20 sets in a
session, 20 sets and 30 sets. And I've
worked with people that have less than 1
minute rest so that they're continually
working for the entire hour because
they're hardcore. They don't have a drop
of muscle on them and it's like, "Yeah,
this is how I train because I'm a hard
worker." And it's like, "Okay, if you're
doing that much work, it's like running
a marathon and expecting to build
muscle. Look at the best marathon
runners in the world. They do not build
muscle from running marathons." Now,
there's going to be someone out there
that says, "Actually, you can build
muscle from doing cardio if you're an
absolute newbie." And that's factually
correct. Okay? So, if you're an absolute
newbie and you are under stimulated,
you've never moved or done anything,
you're so undertrained, something like
as low impact as cardio training can
cause muscle hypertrophy because it is a
higher baseline than what you're used
to. But you'll adapt to that stimulus
and then of course eventually it will no
longer be a stimulus. It will no longer
cause muscle hypertrophy anymore. So, we
understand that, right? Doing countless
amounts of volume doesn't equate to
countless amounts of muscle hypertrophy.
Either way, that's a kind of long-winded
rant where I'm talking a lot about
people's arguments for and against how
much volume we should be doing if our
goal is muscle hypertrophy. And
something that I like to talk about is
not everyone's goal is purely muscle
hypertrophy. I think muscle hypertrophy
is a fantastic thing. And even in
strength communities, muscle hypertrophy
is absolutely something that most of the
best strength athletes work towards
doing is building as much muscle as
possible. Okay. However, training for
strength, strength is a skill. So,
everyone understands that. A lot of us
have heard that saying before. Strength
is a skill. So, the skill of lifting
heavy weight, the skill of coordinating
our bodies in a way to ship the heaviest
loads possible. Because of this, we want
to be able to practice this skill with
good technique, with adequate force
production, with adequate speeds. And
when we train to fail, we're reducing
the bar speed. We're reducing the force
production. Well, we're trying as hard
as we can, but there's a difference in
technique to what we're going to be
hopefully using when the strength is
needed, such as in palating competition
or any other strength competition. So,
at the highest levels when we train for
strength, the objective is typically not
to train to failure. Right? So, a lot of
the times when people are arguing, do
you train to failure or do you not? A
lot of people might say, my favorite
strength athlete on the planet doesn't
train to failure, so therefore you
should never train to failure. And then
the next person says, no, my favorite
athlete always trains to failure. And
look at them, they've won Mr. Olympia.
It's like you're arguing about two
different things. One person's outcome
is max muscle. One person's outcome is
max strength. Two different goals. Okay?
So, this is where we have to understand
what we're talking about here. Either
way, here's my argument. Training for
muscle hypertrophy is also a skill.
Okay? And whenever I write a program for
anyone, even if your goal is muscle
hypertrophy, week one of any program,
I'm going to set you up so you've got
repetitions in reserve. I'm going to set
you up so you walk out of the session
feeling like you could have done more.
Why? So that next week you can do more.
Here's the next thing. Week one of any
phase, week one of any new program, the
lifter needs to familiarize themselves
with the demands of the entire program,
starting with the exercise selection. So
a lot of the times on a new program, you
might be doing an exercise that you
didn't do on the last phase. So, a low
bar squatter might have done a phase of
low bar squats and then move it over to
a high bar squat pattern, which they
haven't done in a phase or two. I'll
tell you now, even myself, I am an
advanced squatter, but because I haven't
done a high bar squat in a while, it
will feel slightly rusty on week one of
my program. So, I wouldn't be able to do
a true one rep max on week one of my
program when I'm familiarizing myself
with the new movement. I would
appreciate a couple of weeks of
practicing that skill again, of refining
that movement again before I exert
maximal force onto that movement. Okay?
So, there's a few things. So, it's
familiarizing yourself with the
exercise, familiarizing yourself with
the new demands of the new program. So,
the new rep range that you're doing, the
new amount of volume, the new sequence
of exercises throughout the session.
Okay? So, these are the things that we
need to be doing on week one.
familiarizing ourselves with the demands
of the program so that next week it's
like cool I know what to expect. Now, I
would prefer to do that and not actually
add the complexities of going to failure
on week one. Saving repetitions in
reserve so we can get a feel for the
demands of the program and then come
into week two saying, "Okay, cool. I
walked out of session one or week one
knowing I could have done more."
Beautiful. I'm going to come into
session two or week two knowing that I'm
going to add weight to the bar. That
actually feels really good. as opposed
to training week one as hard as you can,
failing repetitions and coming in on
week two going, "Damn, week one was
really hard. How am I going to progress?
If I failed repetitions on week one,
what do I need to do on week two? I've
got to try and not fail." If I'm failing
repetitions on week one, do I have the
right to add weight to the bar on week
two? Or do I need to stick to the same
weight so that I can progress, so that I
can complete the prescribed repetitions?
That's a shitty feeling. That's a shitty
conversation you're having with
yourself. I prefer to say, "I left a
repertoire and reserve on week one. Week
two, I'm coming in here. I understand
the demands of the program. I had a
great week of practicing the the new
techniques. And week two, I'm going to
come in and I know I'm going to add
weight to that bar. That feels great."
Okay, so now you've got two great weeks
of success. What's going to happen on
week three? You've had two great weeks
of success. This is also known as
building momentum, which feels nice.
Likelihood of progression on week three
is high. Our training morale is high.
Our momentum is high. We practice the
demands of that same program for two
weeks in a row successfully. Our skill
level is also increased. So here's the
strategy. In week one, we want to set
ourselves up for progression, leaving
repetitions in reserve. Allows us to
learn the movement, allows us to
maintain quality execution and
understand the demands of the program
and build momentum into the following
week. So that's the points that I've uh
documented in that long- winded spiel
that I just gave you. Uh but it's all
written down here for you guys to come
back and read more about. Okay. So
understanding the reason, so this is
kind of moving back. Understanding the
reason why people advocate training to
fail is because of one major drivers of
hypertrophy, which is mechanical
tension. The closer we get to failure,
the harder the muscles has to work. The
more muscle fibers contribute, the
greater the hypertrophy stimulus
becomes. So there is definitely some
truth to training hard. But we also have
to understand the cost. What is the
cost? The cost is fatigue. Increased
fatigue, technical breakdown. So
technical breakdown when we have a
strength goal can be detrimental to the
outcome. Okay? So we don't want
technical breakdown when strength is a
skill. We want to practice that skill
with high quality movement as well as a
reduction in recovery. The stronger we
get, the heavier weights we lift, the
longer it takes to recover from
exercise. So the more advanced you are,
the better you are at knowing how to
work hard. The better you are at working
hard, the longer your sessions take to
recover from. So that's another
discussion that Dorian Yates talks
about. So I'll always refer to Dorian
Yates. He's kind of like I would say
he's right at the tippity top of this
trending theme of two top sets and just
training as hard as you can. I believe
he kind of trained three times per week.
>> So then I try and train four or five
days a week and immediately my progress
would stop. So then I go back to three
days and it would start again. So
>> but I know that he spoke about his
sessions not even lasting that long.
I've even heard him say things like 45
minute sessions,
>> but the most I was training was four
days out of six and
>> okay,
>> no more than an hour
>> uh workout,
>> short and intense workout,
>> you know, where he'd take his sets to
absolute fail and beyond. But he knew
how to do that. He was very advanced. He
knew how to work hard. He'd warm up
safely and get to that top set and
absolutely
send it to the point where it's just not
logical to do more sets. That's called
junk volume. You know, we talk about
diminishing returns. A lot of people
think more warm-up sets equals more
accumulation of fatigue. Well, the way
that I like to warm up is stimulate, not
annihilate. So, in my opinion, a lot of
the times when I'm training someone and
I'm warming up correctly, the warm-up
sets, I'll do more of them with smaller
incremental increases, which you know,
longer rest between those sets, which
end up being stimulating and allow them
to get higher quality and higher loads
in the consecutive sets. So, when you do
it correctly, not only is there not
diminishing returns in the consecutive
sets, it's actually stimulating so that
it's improved quality of sets in the
consecutive sets. very long-winded that
discussion. I hope that makes sense.
Training to failure comes with a fatigue
cost. So, if you're training as hard as
you can, you're training to failure. It
comes at a fatigue cost. But that's the
strategy of someone like Dorian Yates is
to train as hard as you damn well can to
the point where you are fatigued. But
they understand the cost and they say
correct that means I've spent everything
and I don't need to train anymore.
That's a hypertrophy strategy for
Dorian. It's worked very well for him.
But understand the level that he's at.
He's very strong. He's very advanced. He
knows how to work hard. We've got only a
couple of minutes left, so I'm going to
go straight into the strategy. Recapping
on the entire session, we've got linear
periodization where we're starting our
long-term plan with higher reps, and
gradually over the course of the
long-term plan, we're reducing reps so
we can increase the load. Next, we go to
exercise selection. We're starting with
the most complex movements, longest
ranges of motion, exercises with the
highest degree of mechanical difficulty
and then gradually choosing easier
exercises over the course of a long-term
plan. So, there's two great strategies
in guaranteeing we can add weight to the
bar every time you come into the gym.
And the third is my absolute favorite,
periodizing effort. And here's a
strategy. when we set up our week 1 to
four, if we're using a four-weekly mess
cycle, of course, some of us use 6
weeks, 8 weeks, 13 weeks, whatever it
is, as long as you can justify like I'm
about to justify for you now. Week one,
I like to say as a session average,
we're working towards about 7 RP.
Another way of explaining RP is with a
paired repetitions in reserve. So 10 RP
is working as hard as you can. 10 RP is
zero reps in reserve. 9 RP, one rep in
reserve, 8 RP, two reps in reserve, and
so on. So week one, seven reps in
reserve as a session average. Of course,
it's subjective and of course we're not
going to get it perfect, but we get the
point. We're working towards we're
aiming towards three repetitions in
reserve or 7 RPA, 7 out of 10 intensity.
So that we walk out of the session
feeling like we could have done more.
And then we come in on week two and we
add weight to the bar. We know we can.
And that means we might also need to add
some effort. How much effort? 8 RP
session average. What do we do on week
three? So, if you're doing an 8 RP
session average, that means we still
didn't take any of the movements to
fail, which means we succeeded again. We
completed all reps and all sets, which
means that we're going to come in on
week three with momentum, high
confidence that we're going to be able
to add weight to the bar again. That's 9
RP. So, we have to try a little bit
harder again. Fantastic. Week four,
we're setting ourselves up to work
towards an R 10. So even though I
suggested that strength is a skill and
we need to be performing our strength
with high quality movement, which means
not grinding out and not deviating from
technique as best as possible, it's also
a skill to understand what it feels like
to grind out. Because if you're a
competitive strength athlete, uh that's
the position that you might be in in
competition when you're maxing out. You
might be in a position where you are
grinding out and breaking down technique
and you need to know what that feels
like. Okay? So when we're talking about
repetitions in reserve, it's also
important to understand what it means to
fail, what it means to push as hard as
we can. So we do understand how many
repetitions in reserve we actually have
because there is a lot of research on
this where the research suggests that
humans are extremely poor at
understanding exactly how many
repetitions in reserve we do have. Okay?
Okay, so the way that they do it is they
do things like they say uh you know do a
set of eight or do a set of however many
reps and tell me when you've got two
repetitions in reserve and they stop and
they say good right about now and they
say go do as many reps as you can now
and uh most of the times they do a lot
more than two repetitions. So humans
typically underestimate how many
repetitions we actually have in reserve.
So how do we get better at that? How do
we get better at being more precise with
predicting how many repetitions we have
in reserve? by exposing ourselves
intelligently
safely to failure with this exact
strategy and that's the end of the
discussion my beautiful team so that's
uh something that I like to say is you
know programming strategies it's like
what's the best program what's the best
exercise what's the best all of these
things there's so many things that we
take into consideration okay so the best
exercise is the one that you'll do I
like to say I don't have an emotional
attachment to any of the exercises so
you know there's so many different
exercises that can target a specific
muscle. So there's squat patterns,
there's a hack squat, there's a pendulum
squat, there's a lunge, there's a
barbell squat, there's so many different
exercises that can achieve the same
outcomes. So a lot of the times I like
to say if you hate an exercise that
you're doing, don't do it. Unless of
course you play a sport where you need
to do that exercise, well then tough
luck. You better learn to like that
exercise unless you want to change that
sport. Okay? But otherwise, I like to
say I don't have an emotional attachment
to any of these exercises, which is why
I've given you guys options with the
exercise variations. When it comes to
the perfect program or the perfect
exercise, you know, I like to say that
training morale plays a huge role in our
overall decision making for all of our
program design. Okay, but this is what
we need to consider. Setting ourselves
up to succeed so that every time you
come into the gym, you guarantee you're
going to add weight to the bar. There's
three of my favorite strategies for you
to do exactly that. Love you all. I love
you all equally. Guys, this is what I do
for a living is I educate personal
trainers online. So, if you want to be
part of this group, this is what I do
every single week is I give programming
strategies as well as business
strategies as well, teaching people how
to build a brand on social media. Uh
that's also something that I'm pretty
good at, especially over the last few
years. If you've been following me on my
Instagram channel, I've been growing at
a pretty decent rate. I would say I've
tripled my followers in the last 3
years. Uh and I've been on Instagram for
over 10 years. And for the first I would
say seven or eight of those years I did
okay. But the last three years where
I've applied all of the methods that I
like to teach today is where I've seen
the most growth. So if you want to learn
from me, hit me up. I'm going to leave
all the links here in the descriptions.
Uh and uh yeah, hit me up if you want to
be working with me where I educate my
team on how to run a business, build a
brand, and uh yeah, make lots of money.
I'd love to help you. Anyway, hope you
enjoyed. Take care.